Of, um, 2025.
Welcome, um, Alan, welcome Tim.
Um, as you will have gone through previously,
we've got a structured agenda, which we've got a copy of.
Um, give you the opportunity, some opening remarks, um,
and then we'll open up questions
and broadly follow, um, the, the headings
that we've got on the structured agenda, um, as opposed
to the, the individual subparts hand over to you.
Well, thank you chair and good morning members.
Um, thanks for the invitation to meet. I'm Alan Bollard.
I'm the chair of the Tertiary Education Commission.
Been in that role for about six months.
Uh, with me is Tim Fowler, who you'll know, chief executive
of TEC and members of the executive team,
Jillian Dungeon Delivery.
Nina, Ava, um, careers in Investment Design, John Ulli,
corporate and Finance, and also Simon Hall.
Special Projects, uh, as you know,
we lead the government's relationship
with the tertiary education sector,
and we've got statutory responsibilities for funding
and monitoring tertiary education organizations.
We're also the New Zealand Government's Careers Agency.
We are looking to build links between schools,
tertiary providers, employers,
and communities to ensure that learners are ready for work
and for further study.
Uh, this year we continue, of course
to deliver our core business,
but we also needed to focus on significant new priorities
that have been set by the government
to lift system performance.
In particular, we've been leading the redesign
of the vocational education
and training system,
delivering on some significant policy changes there.
It's involved the Disestablishment
of the New Zealand Institute of Skills
and Technology, previously known as TE
and the Workforce Development Councils.
And we're now helping the establishment
of regional institutes of technology and polytechnics
and the industry skills boards.
It's been a huge task with these new institutions
and their boards and transition plans,
and we are focused on minimizing the disruption for learners
and providers with a smooth transition to the new system,
mainly starting early next year.
Um, other priority initiatives.
We've moved the fees free policy from first year
to final year study that will also be implemented for the
2026 um, year.
We've been supporting the University Advisory Group review,
and next year we'll be implementing resulting changes
to improve the overall effectiveness of the sector,
including redevelopment
of the Tertiary Research Excellence Fund.
Um, our focus is a high performing system.
We are meeting diverse learner and community needs.
We're trying to drive better outcomes
and equip New Zealand with skills
and qualifications that are essential for economic growth.
Currently, demand for tertiary education is exceeding the
T'S Limited funding,
and that for next year will depend on the budget.
We are focused on invest, investing in some specific areas
that align with government priorities, including health
engineering and information technology.
Uh, we've been continuing
to deliver our careers function this year.
It's a collaborative effort underway
to transform the whole careers landscape,
and that's involved bringing together ag government
agencies, employers, schools, communities,
professional bodies.
It centers on a new publicly available careers information
service, the TU Career Navigator System.
I hope you've had a chance to look at that.
It's been launched nationwide.
It's quite a powerful new online planning tool designed
to empower New Zealanders to explore career pathways
and make more informed decisions, uh, for the year ahead.
We're looking forward to giving effect
to the new tertiary education strategy through our funding,
our monitoring and our influencing roles.
And there's still significant work to be done
to complete the vocational education
and training system redesign.
We, from the organization's point of view,
we have put in place significant savings over the past two
years, and we're now operating with the reduced staff.
I want to thank our people
who have driven these major developments in a very tight
timeframe and continue to provide the board,
which is mainly new board members with confidence
that the TEC is well placed
to keep delivering successful outcomes
for students and trainees.
Uh, chair, we're very happy
to take your questions. Thank you.
Thanks very much. Um, good.
Take questions from 20 no
questions, uh, mute.
Otherwise, thanks one can.
Alright, well, thank you very much.
Um, so when it comes to, um, workplace delivery or,
and workplace lead, um, literacy
and numeracy programs, um, can you give us, uh, an update on
how that has been performing
and, um, any changes
that you've seen happen over the last budget year?
Thank you, and I'm sure you'd want me to pass over
to Tim Fowler who knows
so much more about all of this than do
Good morning. Um,
and, uh, really pleased to be here as always.
Um, so you'll, you'll appreciate that The, um, employer, uh,
led workplace literacy
and numeracy, um, fund is, is is part of a, um,
a suite, uh, within the Maori category appropriation.
It's about $25 million between the provider led side
and the employee led side.
Um, the,
the provider led side probably is about two thirds of that fund.
Uh, and what we've been doing is obviously really wanting
to try and grow the, the level of, uh,
delivery from the employer led component to that.
So, um, and 2025, uh, to da year to date,
$8.1 million, uh, through the employer component, uh,
funding 36 programs, uh, for around 1500 learners.
Um, I think the interesting thing in this space is that, um,
what we've been trying to do is encourage, um, learners,
so encourage employers, especially in those rural remote,
um, you know, areas of Northland, uh, Gisborne, Hawke's Bay
tried to really encourage those, uh, employers to be able
to pick this, uh, program up.
And, um, that has, that has been working.
Um, I, I think the, the key for us in this space is that,
um, often what you tend tending to do is work
with employers who've never engaged with, uh,
a government funding agency before.
So what we've been trying to do is get our business
and partnerships team sitting alongside them
to help improve the process for making it more likely
that they'll, um, pass the hurdles of,
of up application approval, uh,
on first pass rather than having to go bit, you know,
backwards and forwards to, um, to see that get through.
Um, clearly this fund is primarily about literacy
and numeracy, the hints in the name,
but, um, ultimately what that talk, what
that is about in the workplace is
about, uh, health and safety.
It's about productivity, uh,
and trying to give people a bit of a taster of, uh,
you know, engaging in tertiary education and doing more.
Um, and just a supplementary on that, um, does it include,
um, for example, helping with, um, apprenticeship, um,
programs that helping people to get through their modules
or, um, to be able to do the skills that are needed
to be able to pass their requirements?
This one specifically is about literacy
and numeracy, so it's very much a foundation level,
course level one and two.
Mm-hmm. Um, what we, what we would obviously love
to see is people who have gone through that, um,
improve their literacy and numeracy.
They're obviously performing better in the workplace,
but then, then opens them up to the opportunity
for maybe a pre-apprenticeship trade
or going directly to an apprenticeship.
Um, and that is, that scaffolding up is clearly
what the whole system's about.
Okay. Thank you. Um,
Francisco, uh, thank you.
Sorry. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, in your opening, uh, statement,
and forgive me for paraphrasing, uh, exactly right.
You said, uh, something along the lines that demand
for tertiary education is exceeding
their T'S limited budget.
Um, do you know which universities have reached 100%
of their enrollment caps, um, for this year,
and which, which, um, OEX have ITPs have done that?
So just to give you a bit of a sense of that, Francisco,
so the budget this year
very specifically funded 99% of demand, right?
So, um, that's the nature, that's the basis for, uh,
for Alan's, uh, Alan's statement.
What we've seen this year is, uh,
universities generally up 4%.
Um, most of those institutions, um,
only one of them is delivering below their level of,
uh, their funded activity.
And that is, um, that is messy. Everybody else is up.
We have approved, um, I think it's three Jill, um,
three universities to deliver over 105% Yeah.
Of their funded allocation of their, of their allocation.
Yeah. Now, in case of the polytechnics at the moment,
you'll, you'll appreciate that, uh, N-Z-I-S-T looks
after both work-based learning as well as, um,
provider-based, uh, training within the same entity.
Work-based learning is very significantly down.
It's been down double digits for the last three years,
consistent with economic cycles, et cetera, et cetera.
And we could talk more about that if you'd prefer.
Uh, but on the provider side, they are up 4% as well.
Can I elaborate? Can I pass support, stop
and then stop for Grant.
Um, so when you say that the demand has been funded at,
at, at a 99% level, what's happened to, does that mean that,
uh, 99% of students who've tried
to get into a course have been able to get into it or
No? What that, what is,
that's just talking about the amount
of money that is in the system, right?
The, the entities themselves has the, have the ability
to enroll, uh, up to one, up to 102%.
Yeah. We will, we pay for that activity, yeah.
Between 102 and 105%.
Um, they can enroll the students
and they can charge them tuition fees,
but the TEC won't pay a tuition subsidy for them.
So they're still getting, so just to give you a,
a very specific example, um, if it was,
let's just make it up and say it was Victoria
and they enrolled in an extra law student, uh,
above the 102%.
They don't get the seven
or $8,000, uh, tuition subsidy from us,
but they can charge the tuition fee of another seven
or 8,000 bucks right
above 105%.
We have already always set that
as the outer boundary marker, uh,
above which institutions cannot go without our permission.
And it has been extremely rare for us to allow institutions
to go above that in any, in any year.
What we have done this year through our board
and through our minister
and the Minister of Finance is, um, allow
many more institutions to go above that should they wish,
because they're effectively taking on the risk of
having more students who they're not funded by us for.
Um, so we have agreed, um, specific percentages
above 105% with individual institutions,
and, um, we would likely expect to do that again in 2026.
Okay. So for Grant and up For Shannon. Yeah.
Um, so just outta interest, is, uh,
Lincoln University one of those
Ones? Yes. Yeah.
Is that a reflection
of the extra interest in the rural sector, you feel?
Is that what feedback
You're getting? Um,
look, they have
not specific from the rural sector.
Uh, they've had had a lot of, um, they had a lot
of sig very significant growth in a computer science program
in 2024, which led to them being, um,
really significantly higher.
Um, we've pulled that, well, they've pulled that back
after a conversation with us, so, um, but I would,
but just generally, I think what we are dealing
with here is, uh, a situation where with the,
with the economy the way it is mm-hmm.
The demographics, IE the large number of students coming out
of high school where at a, um, at peak peak, uh,
students graduating from high school, um, based off
what happened better part of 18 years ago.
Yeah. And so it's,
okay, so, and so all of those things are coming together,
and that means increased demand for tertiary education,
and that is very specifically being seen within, um,
the university sector and the polytechnic sector and,
and PTEs, which are massively up as well.
I should, it's not just, we don't,
not just not talking about eight universities here.
We are talking about pretty much provision across the entire
park minus the work based learning,
which is down Yes.
The reasons I've mentioned. Okay. Thank
You, Shannon.
Uh, Tina Cord, thank you. Su supplementary.
A couple of supplementaries on that.
So what is approximately the total number
of enrolled students that universities are currently are
unfunded for by tc?
It doesn't, it doesn't just pop off the
Top hundreds, thousands.
I, I'd wanna come back to you, give, follow I to,
to be able to treat that question with the respect as due.
I think I only want come back and give you the
answer afterwards, Shannon. I wanna get it
Wrong. Um, supplementary
to that is, is what are the, um, areas
of study where you've seen
over enrollment happened within those institutions?
Um, look, I'll just make a general comment that, uh,
the government has priority areas of study that it wants
to see more enrollments in, um, the universities,
but the sector generally has
enrolled more of those students.
Um, so what we have seen over the course
of the last two years in particular is a very significant
increase in health, uh, education and the health space.
So whether that is midwifery, um, nursing, uh, all
of the allied, uh, paramedicine as an example,
all those allied, uh, courses have,
have gone very significantly up.
Um, but, but just off the back of, as I said, again,
the demographics and the economic cycle,
you're seeing everything, everything pop up.
What that's really encouraging us
to do is make some very specific choices about the things
that we want to see more of,
and the things that we would like to see, uh,
or that, that, that are not prioritized
and they would prefer, um, to fund the other things instead.
And so did you go back to the Minister of Finance
or minister for universities and seek additional funding
or the overenrollment
that you were experiencing in areas like health?
Well, I just make a general comment that, of course,
as part of the budget process, um, we are very,
we provide information into that, uh, into both the minister
of universities, minister for Vocational Education,
who has the vote responsibilities for this particular, uh,
area, uh, as well as the Minister of Finance
and Treasury, providing all of the information as to
what we see as the likely demand profile and
therefore how much we can afford.
Um, we've made, um, I think we've been very, um, open,
uh, about the fiscal cliff that is apparent,
uh, two years out.
Um, and I mean, our preference will be
to fund 100% of demand.
We've made that very clear to the government.
We've made that very clear to the sector, um, in terms
of driving economic outcomes
and social outcomes that we know
that we know tertiary education delivers.
Um, but we're equally, um, clear
that the government in this current environment is needing
to make trade offs and we respect that.
And so what was the difference between, uh,
what your forecast told you based on economic conditions,
uh, versus what was funded within the budget?
Well, well, the, I just make a comment
that clearly you'll appreciate that there are, um,
periodic updates in the demand forecast based
around whether it's, uh, BFU or high efu and the like.
And so we are getting information in on
what is actually happening on the ground
from our own data sources.
And then that has been transferred through the Ministry
of Education's demand profile into
what the government thinks the demand will look like.
Sure. So what was the demand? So
there's always a, there's always a gap.
What, what was the demand in your for forecast
and how was that different to
what was actually funded in the most recent budget?
Um, given, Given the, the, the,
the insights that you have?
Oh, we're talking a small number of percentage,
a small percentage number increase. Yeah.
Okay. Vanessa, we next, uh, thank you.
Um, that was actually lastly. Okay, Jan, it was messed up.
Okay. Yeah. Um, good morning.
Hi, Jan. Hey, um, following on from all of that, so
you now would have pretty good longitudinal data,
I would imagine that could do those predictions really well.
So when unemployment is high, demand is going
to be high in tertiary, this is very rough,
the rough assumption, but when it's low, it's not
so high demand.
Is that right?
Up until COVID? Absolutely. Yes.
And I think with what we've found
before 2020 was that the ministry's ability to, um, their,
their model of telling us
what we thought they thought demand would look like,
was unerringly accurate.
Things changed during COVID, a lot of the, we,
we started seeing some anomalous sort of outcomes
that you just wouldn't expect.
So I think what's been happening is since then,
things have been getting back towards
like normal, this what was just gonna last
Normal. Is it coming
back to what it was pre COVID? Well,
We definitely, I see, as I said, with the, the likes
of the work-based learning,
you traditionally accept in a period of
lower economic growth
and high unemployment, that work-based learning goes down
well, that those, those conditions have returned,
and work-based learning has gone down.
Um, in those, in those conditions, you tend
to see more people go into provider-based, um, studies such
as polytechnics and universities that has happened.
Um, so it is getting back to that sort of more normal,
uh, set of arrangements.
Uh, but equally at the moment, I think the, the challenge
for the ministry and their modeling is, um,
they know exactly how many people are
coming out of university.
Um, but figuring out how that works alongside the, uh,
the unemployment rate in particular, um, is, I mean, I think
what we are seeing in our early data for 2026,
especially from, uh, student loan applications
and applications at universities, is that demand looks
to be very significantly up in 26.
So it probably feels like a continuation of
what we're seeing this year,
but I, I, you'll notice I'm being slightly guarded in so far
as I'm, I'm dealing with Intel at the moment, not data.
Uh, and as soon as we get to January,
we start getting information
and directly from data sources of actual enrollments, uh,
from providers.
And that's much, much more valuable to us in terms
of feeding into the budget process.
Okay. Thank you, Francisco. Thank you, chair. Um,
So still, right? Yes.
Yep. Uh, I wanted to ask a question based on, um,
your response to, um, Shannon Halbert's, um,
earlier question where you referred to, uh,
a fiscal cliff in two years.
Can you elaborate on what you mean by that?
Um, fiscal cliff is where, um, the, the total in the,
the total dollars in the appropriation, um,
are less than what we see as being the, um,
the committed spend, um, that far out.
So what that would mean is that, uh,
at the moment we would be, um, you know, funding,
funding that delivery.
But beyond that two years, there is not the money
and the appropriation to keep paying for it.
Right. And is that just diverted
by the government putting more money in, in the public years
Time? And that's,
that's the, it's the nature of the,
the annual budget process where, um, obviously,
you know, governments when they're in
that situation are always having a, the, the conversation
around, okay, it costs this much to baseline something
for four years and beyond,
and that comes with a particular cost.
Um, this is not a, a feature of this government.
It's a feature of every economic cycle
and government that we have, um, uh,
as people in this room would well know.
And, um, periodically governments will make the decision
to fund something for one, two,
or three years rather than,
than the full four, for obvious reasons.
It's cheaper, but you get the opportunity to go
and fund it for the next two years, the next two years,
or the next two years, because you keep having a
budget every, every year.
So at the moment, it is the, it, it is the threat
of a fiscal cliff, right.
Two years out. Yes.
Um, that is quite different to the realization of that.
Yes. Yes. Mm.
So what were those examples
of fiscal cliffs that you referred to?
Um, well, the previous, the previous labor government, um,
um, funded two years.
Uh, and let see, gimme years, right?
In 2023, um, committed to fund two years
of a tuition subsidy rate increase for degree level study
for universities, uh, and rest of the sector.
Um, that cost, I think $60 million per year over
and for two years, um, that was funded for two years.
So that has created a fiscal cliff for this government.
So, I mean, this is, it is the nature of the,
the budget environment
and the economic environment that we work in.
Uh, and of course, our job is to feed, put the Ministry
of Education into the budget process
and say, this is the risks, these are the risks of
that particular set of circumstances.
Okay. Let's move on from that. Um, I'm
Gonna change tech now.
Just wanna ask a question.
Tim's been no surprise, um, to you given questions I asked,
um, last year around the cost of, um,
compliance on tertiary organizations.
And just interested what progress TEC has made in response,
um, to the minister's expectation
to avoid data duplication on our, um, tertiary institutions.
Thrilled to get that question, uh, again, chair.
And, um, I, I, I think the, the, the, the, um, the balance
that we are trying to, to navigate here is on the one hand,
making sure that we've got really good accountability
for $4 billion of public money, uh,
but also trying to get outta what, out of the way
of institutions to do the things that, uh, they're doing
to deliver really good outcomes for, for students
and employers and communities.
So, um, I mean, in the design of,
uh, any new particular policy that we've got
or any new fund, clearly, um, you know, trying
to reduce compliance wherever possible, uh,
is a really important component of what we're doing.
Um, and
what we've done in the course of the last 12 months since,
since we had this conversation last, is, um,
we've looked very closely at the overlaps between
what we are doing and what NZQA is doing, in particular, uh,
looking for any overlaps
or anywhere, anywhere we've got, um, um, duplicate,
uh, data collection and those sorts of things.
Uh, I think one of the things that we,
when we keep asking institutions what are the things
that they think that we could do less of, they tend
to point us towards the code of pastoral care
for international students, which
of course is actually NC QA requirement.
Um, but there are, um, a small number of data things
that we're actually trying to reduce with, with NCQA.
Um, one of the other things I just would note, um, equally,
um, we have had a done a fair bit of work in the last year
with, uh, the PTE sector
and asked them what they think, um, we should be doing,
uh, to reduce compliance.
They've been really clear with us around the level
of financial monitoring, uh,
and performance, uh, monitoring that we do of them.
And so, one of the things that we're, uh, at the moment,
we require quite in depth financial, uh,
information from any PT
that receives more than $50,000 of government funding.
We've made a commitment to increase, uh,
the threshold for that.
Um, so we're not unduly, um, you know,
putting burdens on very small institutions that get, um,
you know, not very much from us.
Um, and, um, you know, trying to make that the path, the,
the process of submitting information, uh,
and working with us, uh, fast, simpler.
So I'm, I'm pretty confident that working on that front,
a a couple of very small, um, examples
that we've done in the last two years as well.
Um, uh, we've simplified the process for, um,
approving microcredentials.
The whole idea of microcredentials, of course, is
to get them to the market really fast.
Yeah. So we want to get outta the way of that process
and make that really, um, um, work really smoothly, um,
that we expect that pro that work
to be done by the end of the year.
Um, and so we'll be able to be, uh, um, introduced.
And then the last one I'll just note here is that, um, um,
we quite like plans, um,
and especially when we are asking every institution as to,
um, submit an investment plan to us.
Um, and so what we've done is, um,
collapsed disability action plans
and learner success plans within the
overall planning process.
So there's not duplicate, uh, and overlapping requirements.
Um, so in, in summary, it's going to be an ongoing process
for us to make sure that we're, you know, being alive to,
to the, the cost compliance.
Um, we're trying to balance that against our, the, the,
the accountability, which I'm, I think you'd want us to have
around the $4 billion.
Yeah. Um, but trying to make, um, anything new
that we're doing, you know, low compliance by design.
Um, so try this UPS on that.
Then the first is great to hear the work that you're doing.
Have you quantified the savings in two fronts, uh,
as a result of that one being for you as TEC
and the other being for, um, your customer in this context?
Um, the providers,
Uh, I think it true answer is that not yet.
And we, we absolutely, uh, want to do so
because I think from, from our perspective, there is, um,
time savings at each end.
And, uh, what we'd probably anticipate doing is using our
tertiary sec, the sector survey, which we do annually to,
to be able to actually, um, quantify that in some form.
Okay. Um, So expect us to come back. So
Yeah, we'll look forward to
an update on that in the future.
Yep. And then the second, um, sub is, so
that's great from a incremental improvement perspective,
but over the lifetime of TC, if you look at the size of TEC,
uh, and the complexity of it relative to student numbers,
TEC has grown, uh, significantly.
When was the last time TEC?
And it may be a question at, at a board level as well.
When was the last time TEC stepped back
and said, without changing this, um,
accountability question and point you make Tim,
and you make well, but the danger there is it can be,
therefore everything we are doing,
we're doing in the right way to achieve this outcome.
When was the last time TC stepped back
and said, are we approaching this either as effectively
as possible as a system, using the right tools as a system?
How could we create step change in the size
of the bureaucracy relevant, uh, relative to, um, the size
of the sector, given
that historically significant increase in, um,
in your organization per student number?
So just, Uh, just for clarity, um,
and you may wanna comment down on,
but I, I just for clarity, um,
we've got six more staff now than we had in 2017.
Yeah. So we have not had at all, um, a
permanent increase in, you know,
large increase in, uh, in staff.
The, um, the,
the increase in staff we've had since 2017 has been for time
specific project activity such as the reform
of vocational education, um, large capital builds
for IT programs, which we'll talk about later, uh,
or the current vocational education
and training reforms that Minister Simmons
is, um, reassuring through.
So, um, just to, for context, um,
That's in the recent history,
If it's percent increase in staff Yeah.
That's in recent history. I'm going back to
when I sat on a polytechnic board.
The size of TC was significantly smaller than it is now.
And I, I'm not, you, you might,
the answer might be you've done the exercise and,
and you're happy, but my question is,
have you done the exercise?
Can you comment? Yeah. Th thanks for the question.
Um, and the board's very interested in this, of course.
It's, as I was saying, it's
primarily a new board in the minute.
So it means we do look at it from a sort
of clean sheet point of view.
Uh, the impression we get is that,
uh, for a start, the numbers that
of staff have actually reduced over the last year.
Um, we've had to make people redundant.
Um, my impression is you can always expect some room in a,
in a significant size organization to, to move.
But actually we've been contracting over the last two years,
at least our budget's been contracting over the last two
years in real and nominal terms,
and so has our staff numbers.
And we've yet to see what will happen in the coming year
that, again, will depend on the budget.
That's sort of, that's clearly is driving, thinking about
how you can do things more efficiently from
a cost point of view.
Um, the other way is
that we are doing some pretty significant IT investments,
and that's changing the way we're doing some things.
And the board has asked
and received papers on the use of ai, um, now
and potentially in the future,
currently some interesting pilot projects.
And TC will expect to see more of that in the future.
So we are very interested in that.
Um, and there's certain big drivers that are making sure
that staff are very focused on that at the moment.
Great. Thank you. Um,
I'm gonna a primary from Shannon,
unless you've got a staff. I've got a staff.
Okay. Yep.
Um, could you elaborate on the AI pilot projects
that the TEC is um, undertaken?
Um, so, uh, two key ones, I guess.
Um, the first would be that, um, we've got, um,
we've already introduced copilot, uh,
and we've got some teams, um, uh, utilizing chat GPT
as well, um, using public service commission guidelines
to make sure we're doing this within a safe,
safe set of guardrails.
Uh, and the two, the two areas that we've been, um,
trialing is, um, uh, our information technology, uh,
developer teams, uh, using AI
to actually support the quicker and, um, um, coding
and the quality assurance that goes with that.
Uh, and then in our monitoring, crown ownership team, um,
looking at the opportunity to use, um, AI to support
the really large volumes
of financial analysis that we have to do.
Yeah. So we see, I see lots of opportunity really for,
for the a ar I to help us with.
Um, I think it's re thinking about it as infrastructure.
Um, what are the, how we could we use it to support, uh,
increase productivity and the like.
Um, we think of the, um, the data
that we deal with is large.
We get information on 500,000 students a year,
and our data warehouse, we've got information on 4 million
students, and the data warehouse has 8 billion
lines of data.
So the, the potential there to,
to use ai, I think is massive.
So mostly it's being used on the
backend side of things at the moment.
And in terms of the data infrastructure, are there any plans
to roll it out on the customer facing end of things?
Um, well, on the, in the career side
of the park, uh, absolutely.
In fact, we've, um, we're already connecting up, uh,
to Hatu career navigator with, um, the likes
of other platforms that use, uh, AI to drive, um,
c CV building.
So curriculum vitae building on their,
on their careers website.
Um, so I think there's, there's plenty of opportunity on,
especially on the, the, um,
if you wanna call it the customer facing side, um, where,
you know, careers, the careers work that we do careers,
the careers website actually gets 4 million visits a year.
So I think, um, there's real opportunity in that space
to be able to actually enhance Hart's products.
One thing I just would really wanna note for you though, is
that the very, the specific investment decisions
that we make for individual entities,
including the universities and the politics
and the, like, we are not gonna be using AI
to be able to make decisions.
Not yet. Um, can I ask a sup?
Why not even as a primary? Yeah, yeah.
I know you've got a primary, we're not there yet.
Um, in terms of a s on what you've just said,
why not, even if it was as a draft indicator,
why make such a hard decision
and say, we are not gonna use it
to inform our investment decision making?
I didn't say inform, I said make the decision.
So I, I think the, okay. Okay. Yeah. Thank you.
Yep. Um, Shannon
Halbert's primary.
Thank you. So next numbers have peaked in the last 12 months
to 90 odd thousand.
Yeah. Um, and when we look at foundation learning provision
that is available, I understand that, um,
CEOs have requested an additional $4.8 million in order
to provide provision to those young people.
Um, is that your understanding?
Uh, and if so, how much of the allocation,
um, was put in place?
Uh, we definitely have seen them increase in, um, needs
regrettably, and
therefore our demand for foundational liberal education.
Um, we have, um,
there's a technicality around how we are able to move money
around the funds that we have.
So we did need ministerial approval
to actually move money out of, um, levels three to seven
and seven plus to be able to actually,
um, to fund that demand.
But we have done so, um, I, I think the challenge for us
will be back to the earlier conversation we had
around demand generally, which is that, um,
we are expecting foundation,
that foundation level education demand
to be higher again in 2026.
Yeah. Um, I can reassure you that it is an absolute priority
for us, um, getting
the mostly, mostly young people, especially in that sort of,
you know, 20, 24 space, getting, getting people
in education, in training,
and getting 'em on a pathway through to, um, you know,
skilled jobs and all the rest of it as a priority for us.
So are there any, we'll continue to do that.
Thank you. Are there any particular regions
of concern at the moment where young people may not be able
to access foundation learning?
Um, well, not in terms of not being able
to access it, no.
Uh, I think there is definitely a, um, the,
the usual suspects with Northland Tar Neck, uh, Northland,
um, Hawkes Bay
and Gisborne, um, are areas
where the demand is always there.
Uh, we don't have a shortage of, um, the su supply
of the providers to be able to do that.
Uh, the key for us is just being able
to make sure we shift enough money into
that space to be able to fund it.
Sure. So in Northland, for an example, for example,
you're confident that you've
provided enough funding in place,
should a young person arrive to a provider
to enroll in foundation, meaning?
Yes. And if we, if there wasn't enough money there,
then the door is always open to, um, our, that our,
our, um, business advisors to be able
to actually have a conversation with them such that we can,
um, move money within a year.
I, I think the think the point to make here though, would be
that we are always looking at where
the delivery is going up, where it's going down,
which providers are, um, over-delivering,
which ones are under delivering.
And we make in any one year a variety of
what I'll call in-flight adjustments.
Um, so if one university is very significantly down, um,
in February, they can expect a conversation with us in
March, April around taking some money out
of their allocation and giving it to institutions
that have demand for which they're not funded.
And I think that's a responsibility that we've got
to be able to try and make sure
that the money is where it needs to be.
Yeah. And so the Prime Ministers clearly stated
that young people need to get up out of the house and go
and get a job or get into training.
Mm-hmm. Are you giving us an assurance today
that a young person can go
and access foundation learning 90,000 needs
and they'll be picked up and enrolled as a result
that you have enough funding in place
and the allocation is there in order
for the Prime Minister's commitment?
Um, I just reiterate my, my previous comment, which was
that, um, you know, we fund, uh, we are funding all of
that demand at the moment, and it would be
our intention to do so.
Where there is more demand
and there is, uh, allocation at the beginning of 2026,
you would expect us to want
to move money around to be able to do that.
Right. Jan?
Um, Jan, you had us up. Yeah.
I just wanted to go back to your first statement
where you said you had to move money around internally.
So you've had to move it from three to seven levels, three
to seven to onto those foundational courses,
yet your demand still high in the three to seven.
So isn't that leaving a shortage there?
Three to seven does include the work-based learning
as well as the provider based
learning in Polytechs and in PTs.
So three years of double digit decreases, there is plenty
of money within that for that
Fund. So the work based
learning shortage of enrollments there,
I'm, I'm still trying to link this to the first line
of questioning that happened, the earlier line
of questioning around it sort of seems
to all link together here, the work based learning,
It does all link together. Yeah,
It does. I, I get this.
I I've got experience in this area.
Um, the work based learning is going
into the foundational learning.
Is that not going across in the, um,
university's politics as well?
It's both. But there's still a shortage then.
So we have moved money, yeah. Both ways. Yeah. Yes. Okay.
There's still a shortage. Yes. Yeah.
Um, your primary, thank you.
So my question is about compliance requirements on
tertiary, um, organizations.
In your Report, you start by saying, uh,
in this section, which I'm reading, it says, we need
to ensure that learners are getting good outcomes.
The crown is getting value from its investment
of $3.9 billion a year,
and public funds are currently managed.
So I want
to understand specifically about the learners getting good
outcome, what kind of work you do there.
And also I want to understand in regard, uh, uh, uh,
regards, um, of the University of Oakland, uh,
which introduced that WTR paper
and now introduced that as a comp study paper
for undergraduates, and now has backed down
and said it is going to be optional for most, uh,
undergraduate degrees from next year.
So that back down was
because learners also complained
that they were not getting the outcome that they thought.
Um, so I want to understand overall,
what does the statement mean in practice,
and how do you apply this to this example that I have given?
Uh, it, it becomes, in my view, a compliance issue.
But I remember last time you said you look at the quality
control and there was no issues with, uh,
on the quality control side of the paper,
and you can't intervene
because universities are independent.
But given the statement about how you analyst compliance,
I want to understand what does this mean in regards
to the example I've given?
Can I try and answer that in with, in,
in with two components?
I, I guess so at the, at the, at the macro level,
you asked a question, how are we, uh, how are we working
with the sector to, to ensure
that we get good out good outcomes for students?
So, um, issues,
and I should start by sort of commenting that, um, you know,
our observation is that the sector, uh,
generally performs really quite well in this space.
That, uh, and that every lecturer
and tutor that shows up at a university
or a polytech, you know, is, is going there to do
as good a job as they can for, for learners.
Notwithstanding that there are, there are, you know, the,
the degree completion rates around 62% overall, right?
So, and we think that should
and definitely could, uh, could improve them.
So what we've really been doing over the course
of several years is, um, setting a, a level of expectation,
uh, with those institutions around the need
to improve those levels of, uh,
especially first year retention course completions
and qualification completions in particular.
Um, and supported them with a, uh, the development
of a, uh, I guess a framework that allows them to, um,
in their own institution apply this framework.
It basically, it says, um, you need a, a whole
of organization approach needs
to be bought into very significantly by your, um,
governance as well as leadership.
It needs to be supported with investment.
Um, and it really does involve, um, focusing very,
very much on knowing you, knowing, using your data
to understand your learners, uh,
and make, uh, adjustments to, um, the delivery
of qualifications as opposed to the standards
that are required to pass and, uh, course, um, you know,
make changes to the delivery such
that those students are more likely to pass, more likely
to get better grades, et cetera, et cetera.
What we are beginning to see in 2025,
after four or five years of, um, working with the sector
is marked improvements in retention,
especially at the universities, um, in the case of the,
some really significant increases in qual completions.
Um, and so I think we're beginning to, we would start
by saying that the sector is beginning to get it, uh,
and recognizing that over a period of time, that's sort
of thing that we want, we know from the outcomes,
uh, from post study outcomes that students, um, you know,
new Zealanders qualifying with a degree
have very significant increases in lifetime learnings in
comparison to those that don't.
So all of those things are sort of, yeah,
it's all heading in the right direction.
That's the general, if you look at the specific
that you're asking, um, you, you, you,
you're gonna be well aware of the comment I'm gonna make,
which is that the, the, um, the cabinet circular on, on,
um, race-based policies
and the like, um, does not apply
to tertiary education institutions
because they're a form of entity that is
sufficiently distant from the Crown to make
that not appropriate.
I also noted that they have dropped
that course more recently.
Um, and, um,
and look, I think our view is
that from a quality assurance perspective, we want
to make sure, uh,
and we rely upon very heavily in making investment decisions
and allocations of funding decisions at the local University
of Auckland, we rely very heavily upon, um, the extent
to which we can rely upon the quality assurance of their,
of their, of their work.
I think this is a good example of where they've decided
that, um, uh, a change needed to be made if
that suits learners better, uh,
and they get better outcomes. Move along.
Yeah. A quick supplementary, so
what is limiting you then saying that?
What is limiting you there saying that this becomes a kind
of a, a, a compliance issue?
Because, uh, there was bit of outrage from the start
before the paper was officially rolled out, still went,
and, excuse me, I'm asking a question
and they're answering my question.
I'm not asking Yeah, let through the
Chair. Come on. Not
across the table.
So, um, so just want
to understand from you why you don't see this to be a, a, a,
a compliance issue here,
because students found out,
many students said it's not going to be a good thing,
and later on, many more students said it's not a good, um,
uh, you know, uh,
a paper which is giving them the desired outcomes
that were portrayed in the start
and also its use of public funds, uh, which, uh,
in my view were, uh, public funds were not managed, um,
in the way they should have been.
Look, just as a general comment, I,
it, it's dangerous for an, a funding agency such
as ourselves to start leaning into
specific courses at specific institutions when that
set up deliberately distant from the crown.
I mean, it would really, I think it goes well
beyond the boundary, um, of what is, what would be, um,
a safe operating environment for ourselves.
And one of the things I just note is that there are,
there are many examples of, um, new courses introduced
around the, not just courses, but programs
or, uh, you know, paths, pathways,
and the likes for individual student groups at institutions
across the sector, whether it's universities or
otherwise, that are specifically driven
because what they know will, what they, what comes out of
that is improved learner outcomes.
This is an example of where, uh, for a whole variety
of reasons, this, this, the, they've introduced one
and then taken it straight back
out again after a period of time.
I'm less interested in the why that happened,
but what I know is that at the, at the end
of the day at the University of Auckland, um,
they're still getting really good outcomes for the students
who are going through their degrees. So you,
That's not have any issues
with that, that's what you're saying?
Well, I'm just, what I'm saying is
that I've got limited tools to be able to,
to better sustainably lean into this.
And I don't regard it
as a compliance issue in that, in that context. Okay.
We're gonna move along. Um,
we're now gonna move into part two monitoring
and risk, um, management broadly.
Um, so happy to take members questions on that.
Vanessa, you were next to lineup.
Do you have a question in this space? Um, or
otherwise you can come back, come you like Francisco.
Uh, thank you. Um, chair, uh, one of the things that, um,
one of the TA's core functions is to, um, you know,
evaluate financial risk across the, um, the whole sector.
Could you provide an overview of the, um,
financial risk profile across the universities?
And if you've done that for the ITP as well,
don't expect you'll have done that since you're technically
not yet, but if you have,
Yeah. Um,
Give to cover here.
Um, so and again,
can I start at the macro level and,
and then fall out some specifics?
So would've thought, so the overarching, um, you know,
operating environment
for the universities is, is constrained.
Um, I, I do recall that a previous minister
of tertiary education said to the, uh, to the sector that,
um, it's a, he, uh, he controlled price
and he controlled volume,
but beyond that, they can do what they like.
Um, and, and the, the joke is that, you know,
they don't have many lever with, they've absolute freedom
to be able to do the, to be able to actually, you know,
generate revenue and then manage cost.
'cause they can't increase price beyond the, uh, the maximum
that is allowed that are set by government.
And of course, TCS operating within a limited, um,
limited budget as well.
So the, the, the operating environment is constrained
and, um, variety of factors for that.
Clearly, uh,
tuition subsidy rate increases over a longer period
of time has not kept place,
but inflation notwithstanding some pretty significant
increases in the last three to four years.
Um, international education has been slow to come back, uh,
post, uh, COVID.
Um, but in the case of the universities, I think, um, uh,
have seen some very significant increases in the last year.
I think from memory about up 15%, um, uh, on average
University of Waikato up 39% this year.
So things are already getting back to, to normal.
Um, overall, what, where does that leave us?
Well, most of them are still, you know, generating,
uh, they, they operate quite conservatively from a budgeting
perspective, I should tell you.
So, um, what we are mostly seeing is them over-delivering
against their budgeted, small budgeted deficits
or small budgeted surpluses surpluses.
So I think it's a good thing.
Um, but as a consequence, um,
what I think we are seeing generally is that there's a, um,
there are constraints around their ability to, um,
deliver on their capital intentions.
Um, there is, um, uh, a greater
and increasing reliance upon international education.
Um, and I've got to manage obviously, um, you know,
cost inflation in relation to, um, um,
staff salaries and the like.
Where does it leave us overall?
Well, we have, um, two universities, um, uh,
low risk, um, who have got, um, one high,
one medium high, and the rest of medium.
So, um,
but what I should just say, um, as a,
as a broader comment is that our observation is that, um,
you know, they're generally led and managed
and governed really quite well.
Um, and, um, they're across their numbers,
they utilize good financial data
and, uh, financial analysis, they take advice, uh,
and they work with us pretty well.
Great. So Has there been any changes in, um,
the overall risk profile in the past year
or in the past annual review?
P uh, yeah, the key one is a downgrading
of risk at Victor University.
Um, I mean that, that, that technically ranked medium high,
and that's largely because of the metrics that we use.
But they've, um, in my view, they've done a very good job.
Um, and, uh, the, their primary issue is the,
is the constraints based around, um, their ability
to keep investing in, uh, in,
in capital infrastructure when they've got
limited cash flows.
Um, limited surpluses, I mean, so, um, so yeah, that's the,
that's the primary change, right? Uh,
Okay. We'll go to
Shannon, your question. Uh, thank you.
Just coming. Um, so just, just could you please confirm,
um, the revised end date of
So, And the rationale? Yeah.
So that is Rev that is revised, um, to out to the end
of March, 2027.
What was the reason for that? Well,
It's, it's, uh, I think I can sort of take responsibility
for this one because it was our suggestion.
Uh, primarily it's a tidy minds thing of, um, we are, uh,
we're fully expecting that, um, to, to wind up, uh,
N-Z-I-S-T in 2026.
It is an election yet, um, against the possibility
that a government isn't formed
and is in a, in, in a, um, a government isn't able to make,
we aren't able to make the decisions to be able
to wind it up in that last sort of like third of the year.
Um, we've just moved it out, have got agreement
to move it out into 2027.
It is administrative year really, um, is the just,
and I said just tidy minds to make sure
that we're not getting caught out, um,
in any circumstances in 2026.
Thank you. And just, um, looking at the costs
of the reestablishment of existing polytechnics, um,
the indicative costs were about 190 mil.
Uh, there, uh, is that still the working amount
to reestablish those polytechnics, or has that changed?
Um, I'm not familiar with the number
that you are working to there.
So you'll recall that there was a contingency in budget
twenty four, a hundred fifty $7 million.
Um, and, um, the way of,
'cause obviously that we're working
through the recapitalization of the,
the politics is there are a team being stood
up on 1st of January.
Um, there needs to be, so we need to have money
to recapitalize those,
but then you'll recognize that there's still four, um,
sitting within N-Z-I-S-T that we need to, uh,
reach an agreement on with cabinet,
uh, as to what we do with them.
So we need money for whatever happens there as, yeah.
So you've got a hundred and 170 allocated in budget,
seven a hundred fifty seven, was
It 1 5 7. And, and
what was, what's the ask
from those institutions on the table?
Well, what, if I can just start off by just explaining
that the, the first place that we're going to is
the cash res cash
and non-cash reserves that, um, N-Z-I-S-T has.
Um, and you'll see from there in your report
that there's no good half a billion dollars sitting on, uh,
sitting in that institution.
And that's the first place that we start.
And then the contingency is exactly that.
That's the place that we go to if we need it later on.
So, um, you know, that's the, that's the job
that we're engaged in at the minute.
Sure. And, um,
So maybe if I rephrase that question, what,
what institutions have requested additional funding, uh,
in the reestablishment phase, and what does that add up to?
Um, well, what I can say is that, uh,
without being pedantic, I mean the, the, the, the process
is not that they have asked for money.
The process is that, uh, between ourselves and the Crown
and N-Z-I-S-T, we are going through the process
of working out what it cost to set those institutions up.
Right? So it's not really an ask of us.
It's this, we we are saying on the basis
of the financial information that we've got,
here's how much money you're getting. Yeah.
So if we take, so that's
And all. And so we will
be able to, at the minute, safely, um,
set the institutions up, um,
before actually using the contingency.
Okay. And so if I use, uh, Auckland's, MIT and Unitech,
or if I use, um, uh, to Yep.
Uh, are you saying that they haven't put up a,
that their view of what the cost is in order to
reestablish themselves?
'cause what I want to understand, Tim, as you can imagine,
is what you've been allocated.
'cause we haven't had any, any financial
information on this, right?
Is what you've been allocated affordable to establish 10
regional polytechnics?
Short answer, yes. Francisco.
Thank you Chair. Just following up on, um,
Shannon Halbert's questions, um, I've got a couple,
and the first is, when will, um,
when do we expect the decisions to be made
around the financial allocation of
that 157 million contingency fund?
And the second is, um, I was interested in your answer, uh,
where you said that you, that, um, currently
you could successfully stand up all 10 institutions without
dipping into the contingency fund.
Did I, did I hear that right?
And can you elaborate before, before drawing it on?
So does that mean that you can stand up all 10 without using
the contingency files?
I'm expecting that we'll need to use the contingency
contingency at some point,
but as I said to the, to Shannon, there's, there's,
there are other jobs that need to happen have, uh, to happen
as well, which of course involve what we do with
and what we do with, um, will and the like.
So I mean, there's an element of, of the,
the contingency is there with the very specific purpose
of being where we need more money.
So what we are very confident in is
that the financial information that we've got, uh,
by working with the business divisions within the N-Z-I-S-T,
um, allows us, has allowed the, you know, um, the minister
and cabinet to make decisions around standing them up.
Uh, now that's not to say
that there isn't financial risk in the medium term, um,
but that would be no different to the universities as well.
Yeah. In terms of the way in which the, okay.
And when are those allocations glass up to be?
I've already got those allocations from
The contingency Fund.
No, from the, from the, from the,
remember we go back to the beginning.
Yeah. Is the $500 million odd that, um, that,
that is a Yeah, we are using for IST.
Yeah. The, um, recap
and the way in which we're working with that has been done.
Um, and those institutions know what they're getting. Right.
I'm going to a substance grant and then a s Jan.
Yeah. Hi. Um, you, um, this, how are you getting on with,
um, confirming the councils for the various institutions
that kind stand up? How has that progressed?
Um, so, uh, you'll appreciate that we've got, um, between
the politics and the industry skills boards 18 different,
uh, entities that were just setting up.
Um, and, uh, 10 of those were politics
and eight of the ISBs, uh, all
of those decisions have been, um, made.
Mm-hmm. Um, in the case of the industry skills boards, um,
uh, almost all of 'em have been, um, through a,
uh, uh, industry nomination process.
So really confident that whether they've been appointed
by the minister or not, then they're, um, you know,
they're gonna represent, uh, industry.
And in the case of the, uh, the politics, um,
we've got obviously the, um, establishment advisory groups.
Um, and then, um, most recently some crown appointments,
um, that will be announced.
Um, but those have all been done
and they're now, um, we've been going through a process
of inducting them and introducing them to the world
of tertiary education where, um, those,
some of them aren't familiar with that.
And, um, they are now getting stuck into the, um, the task
that they have got to set the institutions up
between now and the 1st of January.
So, so are the, uh,
have these people been officially appointed in their
positions and given the authority to do their job?
Yes. Yes, absolutely. Yeah.
So, I mean, they, they have, several
of 'em haven't been announced yet just
because we've gone been going through the process of Yeah.
Um, seeing them up. Right.
Um, of the, I just wanted to go back
to the questions about the reestablishment
fund that's there.
How much of that has already been allocated?
So you've got it there.
How much has actually gone out and been used, I guess,
Are you talking about the contingency? Yeah. Zero.
Right. Okay. Um, Tim, in terms of the projections
around establishment costs of the, uh,
10 across the country, if I take examples like Yuko in
tu, um, of part of the wider region, um, I know a bit about
what impact has the government's change
around earthquake strengthening had in your expectation
of the costs to reestablish, um, some
of the PO polytechnics across the country?
So those changes have applied, not just obviously
to the polytechs, but apply to, uh, any institution
that's got a capital asset that looks like a building.
So, uh, but that's, that's been helpful.
That's definitely changed. It's moderated.
Uh, what would otherwise be a, a more significant,
Can you put a number to that, whether it be just
for the polytechnics or for the sector as a whole?
Sure. I would wanna come back to you with that number,
just so I don't, not sure it. So
We'll put that as a, um, as a follow up question,
because if it's significant,
it would've an impact across the, um, system, as you say,
Vanessa's primary, then I'll turn your,
Um, thank you.
Um, so in terms of, um, risk profiles
and things for some of the, um, pri the private, um,
tertiary providers, what are you seeing now, um,
having made some changes in terms of their compliance?
Is there any update on their risk
or are they still looking, be more of the risky profile?
Um, I'm inclined to say the risk is,
we've just noticed that the, the number of institutions
that we would rate high
or medium for financial risk has decreased, um,
dec to gone below 50% for the first time in a while.
So, um, what,
but I just, what I would note is that about two thirds
of the funding that we allocate into the, into PTEs
is an institutions that we, uh, we would rate as low risk.
Right. Um,
and so what you tend to find is a larger number
of smaller institutions in the medium and high mm-hmm.
High levels. Um, I think from memory,
we've had, um, a around 10
PTE failures in the last, in the last year.
Mm-hmm. It's not calling closures.
Some of them have been liquidations, some of them have,
people have, some of 'em are just closed
for a variety of other reasons.
Mm-hmm. Um,
but, um, generally I think we are seeing that, I mean,
as I said, with regards to the universities,
it's a pretty difficult operating environment.
Mm. And, um, but, uh,
but purely looking at, uh, financial risk, um,
what our observations of the ones that we fund,
we're seeing a decrease in that financial risk.
Yeah. Thank
You. Happy
Shannon. Uh, thank you.
This is on the ISBs, um, just to understand how
that transition is gonna gonna work.
So, um, d did you, so do you wanna do an overview
of the timeline, uh, current timeline that you're
Sure. So we
are on track, um, to
Noted that Every day is
Every Day. It's green every
day behind us.
Um, look, there's, the reason I do this,
because there is a lot of transactional activity
and things that need done between now
and the, uh, end of this month,
but we are on track to stand up the eight, uh,
industry skills boards on the 1st of January.
Um, we obviously have the, the, uh,
have appointed the boards, um, uh, which is great.
And, um, so they start their activity on the 1st of January.
And, um, at the same time
as they get set up, we are going to be transferring
the work-based learning components out of N-Z-I-S-T
into industry skills boards to operate
alongside those organizations for up to two years now.
We do have, um, at least one, uh,
work-based learning, um, division within NIST that,
that would like to move into the ISP
and out into a PTE on day one.
Um, we're working throughout that,
and it looks like it's on track,
but we've got to work with the work based with employers
and industry over the course of the coming, you know,
18 odd months to determine
how those other work based learning divisions move out into
the, um, into either a, um, A PTE
or one or another poly team.
So, so Off we go.
So on, I won't go 1st of January.
Let's realistically say, say 1st of March,
what's your staffing capacity to be able
to deliver on the program of work at that particular point?
At the industry Skills board, you mean? Yeah.
Um, well, I think we need to be really realistic here.
The, um, the, the,
the funding's gone from 65 odd million
dollars, I think down to 30.
Um, so there is gonna be a much smaller number of, um,
industry skills board staff, uh, doing that work.
And they, that's the job for those new boards, is
to actually make some prioritizing decisions around
what are the things that are most, most important
to them in, in terms of how they are, uh, referencing, um,
you know, industry's needs in terms of what,
what are the skills, what are the qualifications?
What are the better industry's
needs in that, in that context?
Yeah. And so what's your head count in
the proposed new model,
Um, Versus the head count under wdc?
Yeah, So it's currently two
50 staff,
and we think there'll be 60 to 70 within the new
On Day one. On day one.
Thank you. 1st of January.
And so how much of the 60 to 70 have transitioned over that,
that that's the transition.
Yeah. Um, and so
One thing I note there is that the institutions are going,
the ISBs are going to have their, an opportunity to, uh,
charge for quality assurance as well as, uh, potentially,
um, introduce levies.
We would ex be expecting that, um,
those institutions are going to want to work pretty closely
with, uh, their industry groups to decide, you know,
you know, what is the opportunity to actually, um, you know,
pass on cost and generate revenue there.
That would've, obviously, if that came with, um,
increased service, it would obviously
require increases in FTE.
So what we're expecting those institutions to do is,
over the course of the first 18 months, get a bit of a sense
of actually where their industry wants to go
and what's gonna be acceptable.
Yeah. And then tailor their, uh, their services accordingly,
User pace, um,
and what's, how much money has been paid out
of redundancies across the WCS to date?
I'd need to come back to you on that number because,
because that's, that will be a, I mean, it'll be,
it will have been, uh, forecast within each of the, uh,
wcs, but would, I'd need
to come back and forth, give you that number.
Okay. And what do you see as the, the, um, program
of work that is lost in that transition as a result of,
um, canceling WCS
and restarting a whole new structure?
Well, I tend to look at it a little more along the lines
of what are we, what are we getting instead?
Uh, and I think it's a, it's a, a far sharper, uh,
focus in on, uh,
what industry needs, what are the skills needs?
What are, what are the qualifications needs now
as the funding agency, um, that's the gold for us.
What we want to know is what, what industry
and employers want to be able to invest in it.
So that to me is that that's the core business of those,
of those, uh, industry skills boards,
and that's what we're gonna be getting going forward.
So are you saying that industry
and employers haven't given direction to date via the
WCS on what they need
and want that we have to do that process all again?
Well, it's not, it's not a one-off.
I mean, it's an ongoing activity.
And, um, and as, as, as the economy changes
and as the, um, uh, needs change, I, so I would expect
that we would be wanting to see, uh, an ongoing, um,
engagement from those, from the ISBs with their employers
to know what's, what's, what is required.
And, and the more we can get real time with that,
the better off we are going to be.
Um, and hence Microcredentials and the like.
And so, will industry and employers be getting more and le
or less than what they did under the wcs?
Well, well, I think we need to be realistic with
that decrease in staff.
There is going to be a, uh, a, a far more
focused and targeted engagement on the things that matter,
uh, if you've got fewer people doing it.
That's, that's the trade off.
Thanks very much. So just a, a a final step from me on
that before we move to part three.
So just to confirm, what I heard you say was
that you are going to get a sharper focus on what you need
as the funding agency,
and that's the gold, I think was the quote, um,
to you said that you need.
That's right. I mean, what we want
to make decisions on chair is, is, you know, we want
to ensure that every dollar that we are spending and,
and work-based learning, uh,
and in some, in that, uh, polytechnic space and,
and vocational education is a dollar well spent.
And if that is, um, if
that process helps that, then we're happy. Great.
Do I have any more questions?
Um, we can move to part three,
building the right skills to succeed.
Um, so happy Vanessa is gonna open the batting.
Um, so thank, um, you've alluded a couple of times to the,
uh, career navigator tool, um,
and it sounds as though, um, it's a very exciting, um,
instrument and Bruce really like to hear about how that's,
um, been planned for how, what it looks like,
and, um, what sort of things we can expect to see from it.
Thank you. And, um, I, I was reflecting on this last night
and in preparation for our appearance that, um,
when we had the conversation last year, we were just about
to head into, um, the first pilot with schools.
So since then, when in April this year, we had, um,
60 schools pilot, the, um, uh, the site, uh,
it's now available to all, it's been available
to all secondary schools since September.
Uh, and then, um, available to the,
the broader public, um, since then.
And, um, all the feedback
that we're getting is very, very good.
Couple of things to note for you, I guess, um,
in two days time, we are gonna be turning off
the old Careers New Zealand website.
So that'll drive, uh, a lot of the activity, uh,
through search engine optimization and other tools, uh, and
and so on onto, uh, uh, the career navigator site.
Um, we've got a, um, we've got a metric for the end of, uh,
a measurement requirement for the end of June next year
of about one and a half visits, uh, one and a half, one
and a half, one and a half million visits.
Um, I think we'll massively overachieve that, um, just
through, um,
direct redirecting people from careers into the,
um, into Taha two.
A couple of things, it's worth noting, though,
this is really driven by data.
So, um, whether it's the a hundred New Zealand NCA subjects,
which obviously will be going through the process
of changing with the, the education changes, um,
4,000 qualifications,
and then the 800 new, uh, occupations, um, just by point
of reference, uh, the careers, old careers website,
400 occupations.
So, um, and I think just to give you a bit of a sense of
how we're using this with other agencies, um,
immigration New Zealand, uh, is using Taha two, um,
when it assesses potential migrants in skill shortage areas.
So, uh, they use ATU to check, um, what qualifications
and experience are required,
that's their go-to instead of building it themselves.
Um, similarly stats New Zealand use it, uh, as their source
of information on occupations, um,
and, um, to replace the New Zealand, uh, as,
let me just get this right, New Zealand standard
classification of occupations database.
Mm-hmm. So, uh, I think that's a good example of where,
you know, the taxpayers getting quite good value
for money from, uh, rather than those two, uh,
government agencies going away
and building those sorts of things themselves.
They're leveraging the data that we've got equally.
Uh, and in the case of, um, supporting open data, um,
from government, um, we've got, um,
several private companies that access, uh,
the databases that sit within Te Hatu, um,
through an API that allows them to,
uh, run their own website.
Sorry, API, um, a
Yeah, automatic, you don't even know.
Automatic data feed. Yeah. Sorry, grant. Yeah.
You should know what the technology is.
Um, I'm resisting comment.
So, so good example of, um, you know, this allows, uh,
the likes of Korea Central, which runs its own, um,
um, careers website.
Um, they use data on the occupations
and qualifications through, through us.
And I think, again, um, from a open government,
open data perspective, another good example.
So, um, this is gonna, ATU is gonna require
ongoing development, ongoing feature development,
and the like, uh, we've got lots of plans there.
Um, we update the data every, uh, every year
and, um, do new releases of new features every quarter.
So, um, yeah.
That's a good, uh, good start and,
but lots of work still go. Great. Vanessa,
Stuff on that. Um,
what have you, um, built into your processes in terms
of, um, ma making sure that we are seeing a, um,
an assessment of, um, value
for money in terms of return on investment?
Yeah, so, um, one of the, one of the advantages of having,
uh, new technology in this space is the infinite, uh, level
of, uh, measurability attached to, um, to the work.
So between,
um, you know, number of visits, um, number of, uh, amount
of time people spend on individual parts
of the, the website.
Um, so for instance, the, by far the biggest, uh,
most popular area is the interest quiz.
Oh yeah. Where you can go and spend 10 minutes, you know,
just getting careers ideas
and then it pushes you to other parts.
The site. Uh,
obviously CV Builder is a really
important part of the old site.
That is something that we wanna be aware of
and going forward, 'cause that's really popular as well.
Um, so, um, at an operational level, um, lots
of areas to be that we can actually measure,
but equally at more of a, uh, financial
and governance level, uh, being able to analyze, you know,
um, you know, overall value for money and the like.
Um, I think we've got a really good set of data, uh,
good set of measurement points that're gonna be,
that are gonna be able to, um, give us
that information, make through the decisions. Uh,
Thank you. Um, Jill,
I just had a, um, so on that, uh,
there you've got some of the, um, KPIs for your,
your navigator site.
I was just having a look through the, the farming stuff.
Um, how do you, um, test how effective
that is on a sector basis?
You know, the, some, somebody comes along says,
yep, I'm interested in that.
How do you test that, that what they're seeing is, um,
is delivering what, what their expectations are?
Well, in the case of the information
that's gone in there, Mike Yep.
We've, we've gone directly to the likes of, um, you know,
industry groups or the workforce development council.
So when you'll, um,
I'm sure I know there's a shepherd on there,
and there's all sorts of ones if you, if you go
and look on the profile, something else.
Yeah. Um, all of those have been tested in terms of
what are the skill requirements,
what are the qualification requirements?
What does a day in the life actually look like?
What are the tasks, what are the duties?
All of those have been road tested,
and I, I least call quality assured from those people.
So I'm, I'm very confident, extremely confident, actually,
that what you've got there is,
it's just an extremely high standard.
And furthermore, we've got the tools in place to be able
to adjust things when we, when we need.
Yep. So, uh, just in the last, um, two weeks,
I think we've had three or four more jobs added in terms
of video profiles of, uh, you know, uh,
new roles and occupations.
Yep. Yeah. Pardon? Yes.
I, uh, visited a training organization last week. Yep.
And what they shared with me is this, that,
and what they see in schools is that there is a lot
of promotion, a lot of importance given
to university entrances and not for trades training.
And just want to know from you, if you hear that,
and if there is any role for you as careers agency, uh,
there, and what would you say to this training organization?
Well, well, in the first incident, obviously say that, um,
any tertiary education is a good thing.
Mm-hmm. Um,
and that whether it is a, uh, a trade, whether it is a, uh,
a subdegree level program
or a university level program, um, all of those, uh, the,
the, the longitudinal information tells us that all
of those things give us really good outcomes.
Clearly, um, you get the highest, uh, post study, you know,
income lift going to, going to a degree,
but 26% of our degrees are not at university.
So just make sure that people recognize
that you can get a degree at a polytech, uh, uh, PTE
or a as well.
Um, one of the things we are able to do through the,
through the website is, um, is we've got the opportunity
where, um, where the government has a, a variety
of different, um, of priority areas for, uh,
for skill shortages
and the like, we are able to actually drive
and profile, um, those sorts of areas.
So, um, I think it's,
it's entirely within our responsibility
and gift in some respects to be able to actually, um,
you know, profile
and lift up, uh, opportunities
that are not just at university.
Mm-hmm. Okay. And we do that. Okay. Yeah. Thought to
Francisco. Thank
you, chair. Um, I shared, um, the member, uh, Dr.
Palmer's concerns about, you know, the fact
that we're potentially not prioritizing,
uh, trades trading enough.
And one of the things that has happened in this annual
review period is the, uh, discontinuation of funding
for centers of vocational excellence.
Um, has there been anything that's replaced it?
No, no. Look, just on this,
on this issue of vocational versus degree, um,
if we look over the course of the last 10 years,
notwithstanding the, the, the things that went on
during COVID, um,
we have actually seen a really quite significant increase in
the number of people studying in vocational education
from since before.
So like 20 18, 20 19. Yeah.
So there are more apprentices now than there were then.
I think the learning for us
over the course of that 21, 22, 23 sort of period was that
the likes of, um, TTAF
and the A BI, which effectively put in things
that were free into the system, as we know,
free is never free.
Free just means somebody else pays later.
And what that, what that, what happened with
that was it put on a massive increase in the number
of people studying in vocational education,
and especially work-based learning,
but as soon as those came off, they dropped.
Mm. And we saw some pretty poor outcomes, I think, for,
for learners and apprentices as a consequence,
because employers dropped apprentices when the,
when the Suby got ditched.
So step back from it and look at the 10 year, 10 year run.
Um, we've got more people studying,
more people in apprenticeships, um, over that time.
Uh, and all the data would tell us that, uh,
they get really good, uh,
post study outcomes and employment outcomes.
Great. Uh, Francisco, your
Primary, um, really interesting to hear about the, um,
the Career Navigator service
and, you know, the partnerships that, uh, TEC builds with,
um, you know, employers and things.
Does the TEC do any work in terms of, um, retting the, um,
the ability of students to get, um, grad jobs
for the relevant qualifications?
Because, um, you know, we've seen some concerning trends,
um, you know, over this annual review period.
Um, you know, we've seen that, uh, fewer than half
of graduate nurses, um,
get hospital jobs when they graduate the course,
which is obviously a big concern from, um,
a tertiary education, but also that health perspective.
Um, what work is the TC doing to, um, better ensure that,
um, that the level of graduate that the supply
for graduate jobs is matched for the demand for it?
Well, our job is not in the supply of the, uh, of the job.
Right? Right.
Um, I mean, our job is to fund the, the, the, the people
who are actually doing the training for it.
Yeah. And clearly we want to make sure that our,
wherever possible we are, um, sizing that activity
that is consistent with the, the number
of jobs that are at the other end.
Um, but let's not confuse that with, um,
the number of, the number of nurses that, that, that,
that Health New Zealand has jobs for at then,
because that's a, it's beyond our, beyond our ar ment.
Yeah. No,
No. Shannon,
thank you.
Um, just in regards to the, um,
how we coordinate and collaborate between schools
and employers, um, and the sector,
and we had 'em place the regional skills leadership
groups, um, that ended.
Yes. Change is fine. What, what's replaced that
Structurally?
Um, nothing, but in actual fact, the,
the relationships that we have through our business
and partnerships team, um, has often know
effectively means that we're
still engaging with the same people.
So whether that is, um, um, just talking at the moment
with Venture Taranaki, uh, local Iwi, uh,
and employers around, you know, what are the opportunities
for when we, when we have the conversation in 2026 around
what happens with the local Polytech, um, you know,
what are the opportunities there?
So, um, the RSLG itself,
um, has been taken away,
but that doesn't mean that the conversations
and the, uh, the value from that intelligence
that they were giving us and other
government agencies has disappeared.
'cause it hasn't, it's extremely useful as it turns out. Um,
And so the minister talked about, um, how
that translates into the NCEA replacement
and the role that vocational training will play there,
particularly around the ISVs.
How have you planned for that, and what does that look like?
Come 2026?
We have not started that process yet.
Uh, I think it would be fair to say that the,
the primary task is establishment establishing
entities in another month.
Yeah. Um,
and I mean, we recognize that, um, working
with our MOE colleagues in particular, uh, recognizing
that the ISBs are going to have that, that task around, uh,
thinking through the vocational education, um,
component parts of, uh, the changes to NCA
really, really important.
Um, and I think you can see from the conversation around,
um, how we are running the data within Career Navigator,
that we have a, we have a vested interest in the outcome
because we are going to need to, that will flow
through into the data systems that we've got that inform
young and not so young New Zealanders about what,
what things look like going forward.
So yeah. We, we haven't got to it yet, is the short
Answer. Yeah. And so have
you had,
have you been consulted to date Oh, yes.
On how that would roll out?
What did that consultation look like
and what advice did you provide?
Well, our advice has been involved us
early, and I think that's been done.
So I, I can't complain in any way at all.
Grant, you've got a Start. Yep.
So, sort in this area, I suppose just in terms of that,
the nimbleness of the local, um, I probably taken on an area
to respond to, um, you know, what the employers want.
Do you feel, you know, in, in, in a community, um, uh, uh,
do you feel your systems are,
are nimble enough to cope with that
Grant? I think there is
gonna be a test for all
of those new institutions to ensure they're nimble.
Um, I, I, I think it's less about systems
and more about, frankly, attitude, um, of
the governance of those new institutions,
and especially the senior leadership
to create the environment that says for staff, we are here
for the local employers in our region.
Mm-hmm. And therefore, we need to be really close to
and understand what they done well want, um, if,
if those institutions, if, if they can build up that sort
of environment within the new, uh, entity,
I think they've got every chance of succeeding.
Um, because I think we reflect back on the last decade of
what has gone well and what has not gone
well in those politics.
Um, you'd have to conclude that part of the, part
of the equation only part was that they,
they weren't delivering what local people,
what local employers and, uh, needed.
So you are confident that
with the systems we be sent up now,
that the opportunity there for local, the local governance
and administration to, to achieve that, you,
and you'll be backing and supporting that
A hundred percent. Uh,
and in fact, the, uh,
so I'd say the system's absolutely there.
It's the people who operate the system, uh, that are going
to be the ones making sure that that happens.
Just going back to the comment you made about Taranaki,
um, for the Taranaki mps
and for our Merrill colleagues, is there anything
that we could do to support the conversation occurring, um,
around what the future of, uh,
vocational education will look like, um,
in Taranaki, from your perspective?
Keep doing what they're doing?
Uh, I, I've been really, really,
um, pleasantly not surprised,
but I've been, I've been really, um, appreciative
of the work that they have done to proactively reach out
to us to say, how can we help you, um, to, to, you know,
reestablish, um, Western Institute of Technology
as a standalone entity.
And, um, that's, I know that they're leaning into the, uh,
the conversations locally with the institution itself,
but also with us as well.
One, one of the things I should note is that we are,
you know, we're in a discussion with them around, uh,
and back to the sort of riffs off the, the comment
around the regional skills leadership
groups no longer been there.
We've offered up in the case of, um, of wit the,
or for, for Taranaki at least the opportunity to, uh,
for whether it's through Venture Taranaki
or whomever, um, to have a, for want of a better term, a bit
of an MOU with the TEC where we will, we'll meet
with them a couple of times a year to have a conversation
around the likes of this is what, between the chambers
of commerce, the, the, uh, the EDA, um, venture Taranaki,
uh, iwi, and the, like, this is what
the region needs from a investment in tertiary education.
That's a really good way for us to know, to keep close to
what needs to go, what needs to be invested in locally.
Because it's not just about Witt,
it's about PTEs and the like.
Um, I think that's a really good, um, mechanism
and facility that allows us to be, make sure, making sure
that, um, when we are making recommendations to our board
for investment in the region, they've got some confidence
that that's what's needed.
So, a follow on from that,
under the old polytechnic model, one of the challenges, um,
that certainly we heard was that the provincial
towns, uh, delivery sort
of graduated towards more the provincial city.
So if I think about where I'm based, um, Southern Taranaki,
you know, Western Mantu,
you ended up having a focus on new coal and Palmerston North
and a focus on what in New Plymouth?
Yep. Do you have a map in the TC office
that has the whole country?
So when you're talking to wit,
you remember it includes South Taranaki,
and when you're talking to you Cole,
you remember it includes wire, wpa
and w like I I, I just think of the visuals.
When I, when I ran a business in Africa across five time
zones, we had five clocks on the wall to remind.
I can reassure you, and I'm sure Mike would want to know
that as a, as, uh, a kid from Carin, uh, we always make sure
that the well looked after good.
There you go. No, um, more seriously. Um, no.
Look, I, I think we, the, the, the key way that we do
that is through our relationship managers, um, which
who have, um, uh, a variety of allocated, uh,
organizations that they work to.
And the point there is that they, they are making sure
that we are lining up what we know from what is needed from,
and our other government agencies,
whether it's from the likes of, um, immigration
or from mb uh, MSD and the like.
So we're getting information in all the time,
and then marrying that up against
what we know from the local relationships with the eds
and the like, and remember the Polytech
or the PTE, they're a supplier in that, in that region
when we put a lot of effort in the course the last year
of reestablishing these organizations.
But their job is, is as a supplier of, of that delivery.
So the question for us is, whilst we fund them, our job is
to make sure that that is meeting the, the regional need.
So I'm very, very acutely aware of the,
of the breadth of that meeting.
So sub to Grant first,
and then, sorry, then Vanessa, then on the phone.
Um, is it just carrying on that, that theme
and sort of following on before, so you are confident?
'cause I get a little bit of feedback that at times, um,
there's a bit of constraint
or frustration that there may be some identified need,
and then yet sometimes, whether it be TEC
or NZQA are too slow
to actually help the community deliver in that space and,
and so they can react and therefore,
therefore employers get frustrated
and so they go look for immigrants
to come and that sort of stuff.
So are you confident you, you know,
in your space you can make sure that you're
reacting nimbly enough?
Look, I am, um,
but of course, I, the only comment I'd make is
that it's within the constraints that we've got around
how the, about who we fund.
So as an example, um, we've,
we fund the politics and the PTEs in that space.
If they're not responsive to that need mm-hmm.
And are, and have got the program that is needed,
that's a little bit difficult for us to meet it.
I, I guess the, the interesting one there though is
that work-based learning, especially apprenticeships Yeah.
Uh, that is far more able to, to, um,
to scale up mm-hmm.
If employers are willing to take on apprentices. Mm-hmm.
And, um, and as you know, we we're under delivering in
that space at the minute, if there is more demand
there, we'd love to pay for it.
Just quick on that, so, well,
obviously NZQA have an important part to play Yes.
In, in with the, the courses and so forth.
Do you work with them in this space to make sure
that they're being responsive enough?
I mean, I'll try, I direct, you know,
have you direct that question to them.
Um, look, we've got enough on, on our plate at the minute
to be able to, uh, and manage our own stuff.
Um, but I, I, we, as I right back to the earlier comment
around compliance, we're always looking to a, collaborate
with them wherever possible
and then reduce compliance wherever possible.
But, um, I'll leave it to them to comment
around their responsiveness pa.
So, uh, when we talk about tertiary providers able
to meet the need, that seems to be, in my view,
quite a wide kind of permit.
So are there any specific KPI KPIs in there
that you assess them against to ensure that they,
they are meeting the need
and providing for the right kind of skills?
So how, how do you come down to that?
You're talking about the skills needs locally, you
Mean? Yeah, skills needs. Yeah. Yeah.
Um, well, I guess the proxy for
that is the demand that they have.
I mean, I, I think that if you, if you go back
to the conversation that we've had around the, the, the
politics over the last, you know, couple of decades,
which has seen a, you know, like a third of the,
they've got a third less students than they had,
um, in that time.
It's because that some of them, some of 'em, not all of 'em,
but some of 'em became, you know,
a lot less relevant locally.
Um, so in some respects, I, I think, uh,
top line funding is actually not a bad proxy for, uh, the,
to the extent to which they're regarded as being relevant,
uh, in their local communities.
Um, and,
but that applies across the entire tertiary sector
that applies equally to the universities.
And, and I think you'll see, uh, we'd look, again,
look back at the last decade universities
and the, like, they go through periods of being the flavor
of the month and the place to go to,
and then they don't, they do.
And so their, their job and their job of their council
and the job of their, their senior leaders
and the like, is to say, well, why is that?
And what do we do? Well, how do we course correct
and how do we become, um,
more relevant to the people that we wanna serve?
Yeah.
Shannon, you're thought,
Uh, just coming back to
what you said about apprenticeships,
that we were underdelivering, uh,
you'd love to deliver more. Why aren't you?
There's no demand. Uh,
the demand's gone down 15% every year for the last three
Demand. From who?
Employees.
Employees, yeah. So in an economic downturn,
uh, there's a decision made to remove the incentive
for employers to take on an apprenticeship.
What action has TEC done?
Because I, I don't think
that the demand has stopped from young people.
So what action has TEC taken
to address the lack of demand
that you're saying that there is?
Well, I guess the answer to that really, I mean, it,
it goes to the, um, it, it goes
to the individual business decisions that in our,
in New Zealand's case, mostly small
and medium sized business owners are making,
and in an economic downturn, um, many of them
are deciding not to take on that apprentice
or not to take on the next apprentice.
Yeah. Because the work is not there.
So, I mean, there's a, there's a series of sort
of causal steps here.
I guess the That's right. People screaming comments.
And remember, let's just be clear, less than 20%
of New Zealand businesses employ
apprentices or do industry training.
So, um,
our job on the career side has been
and will continue to be, to promote the value
of apprenticeships
and work-based learning as well as other forms
of tertiary education, because there are
good jobs at the end of that.
Um, but if the growing conditions, uh, within businesses are
not great, at the minute,
I can understand why they're not taking those people on, and
therefore I'm not being asked to put another dollar
into an apprenticeship.
So, as much as we'd love to
Us up on that.
So with the, um, interest rates having come down
and building consents starting to go up,
as per the data reported, even the latest this week,
are you at TEC forecasting those apprenticeship numbers
to start picking up next year?
Surely there is a tie between building
and construction consents
and forward view around apprenticeships.
Um, forecasting is a, um, is a bit of an art.
And, um, so we, we, what, what we are predicting, I think is
that over the course of the medium term,
we'll definitely see that pick back up again.
Uh, and all those, the things
that you've just mentioned here,
I think are particularly good examples of, you know, things
that will give us some confidence
that those numbers will come back. Right.
Just quick, quick stop on that last
Up.
I presume you historically see when economics have gone
that the ups
and downs of the apprentices have kind of followed,
follow that same pattern.
Absolutely. Thank you. Yeah. Right,
Vanessa. Thank
you. Um, so when we are looking at, uh,
the general idea of continuing to support
and invest in programs that work really well,
didn't need festival and invest
where we can see a return on investment, if,
can we reflect a bit on, um, the, the, um,
the Pacific Work Connect program
and, um, how did that, um, you know,
frankly stack up in terms of what it delivered over, um,
compared to what it cost?
And, um, did we see, um,
and you know, that people were getting more
jobs as a result of that.
Um, did it work as a program? Um, and yes. Yeah.
So can you give us a bit of a summary about that
Just by way of context?
So Pacific Work Connect, um, was originally a,
a contract that careers New Zealand had
before they merged into TEC
and they had that contract with mb Yeah.
That funding then shifted to ministry for Pacific Peoples.
Mm-hmm. And then it shifted to MSD. Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm.
For the last, so, um, so the, the last year that we ran it,
um, was, was for funding delivered through MSD.
Uh, we had 257, um, Pacifica,
uh, clients go through, um, the work connect program.
The work connect program is,
is very specifically about one-on-one coaching.
Mm-hmm. Uh, to prepare them for work.
Um, it is not a workplace.
It is, it is not a work placement system.
It's not a, it's not a recruiting process.
Um, at the end of that process, um, so it's largely 16
to 39 year olds.
Uh, 56 moved directly into employment, uh,
11 moved into further training or study.
So of the 257, around a quarter, um,
into either more training or a job.
Um, and 119 were active
jobs seeking up the program.
And then 40 remained on MSD,
uh, mana Active Management.
So, look, I think it's a, um, I think the feedback
that we got from the, from the program was, was really good.
Um, given what we know about the,
the value of getting somebody off the benefit mm-hmm.
In particular, and how what, they're on there
for six months, there's a very strong likelihood
to be there for a number of years.
Um, I think, um, you know, 26%
we were reasonably comfortable with.
Mm-hmm. Um, of course you always wanted to be higher,
but I think the major issue for us was a bit of a,
an expectation mismatch
between when they came onto the program,
they thought it was about a job placement activity,
so we're gonna find you a job.
Mm-hmm. As opposed to we are going
to coach you one-on-one on how to find a job. Yeah.
Okay. Um, members, we're gonna move to part four now,
and we have a question from Shannon.
You, um, so appreciating
that the tertiary education strategy is still intraining,
but there, there is a bit of work
that's been done in this period.
What's, what's the, um, high level themes of feedback
that has have come back as a result of your consultation?
Um, well, I just note that it was the ministry
that ran the consultation process, so, um, I wouldn't want
to stray too much into their part of the park.
Um, but I think the, the general feeling was that a, um,
sector was very appreciative
of having a new tertiary education strategy.
Uh, I know we are, uh, our job is to give effect
to the ter tertiary education strategy.
So it's particularly important job for us, uh,
piece a document for us.
Um, I think, um,
I think the sector is appreciative of having something
that is specifically targeted for them, um,
and focused in on the things that matter.
So achievement, you know, innovation,
commercialization, all those sorts of things.
Research, all those sorts of things.
I think it's gone down part particularly well,
but we just need to wait for it to be, um, I mean,
obviously the themes, themes are very, uh, well known,
but, uh, we haven't have a don't have a, uh,
a document released yet, so we'll certain away.
Can I, uh, just add to that the board's very interested in
the tertiary education strategy
and what it means that we might be doing differently,
and we'll definitely be pursuing that
and next couple of board meetings.
Sure. So, um, the, the inclusion of the, uh,
economic growth component, what's your definition of
that within a, within a tertiary context,
Comment on it.
Oh, I think, you know, that's a good question
that we're gonna be working through.
We've, we've already put together a paper that says,
how would we measure a number of these things?
What do some of these concepts actually mean?
There'll no surprises.
There'll be some nice words in the strategy,
but we are very keen on pinning it down more specifically as
to what it means and see whether
we can make a difference there.
Thank You. Just a few more housekeeping questions.
Um, run us through the state of North Tech. What next?
A lot of activity still going on at North Tech.
Uh, we're actively engaged on the ground, both with, uh,
the, in North tech itself, uh, local, uh, council,
employers, uh,
and the community group that's been doing some work around,
uh, the proposal for our, for a hub.
Um, no decisions being made yet,
but, um, we'd be expecting to go back
to the ministering cabinet in early
2026 for the game plan forward.
And is it more or less learning opportunities
for the people of Northland in its future state?
Uh, well, well, overall more.
Great. Thank you. And last question, um,
how's the Mapas review going?
Uh, that's not in our, uh, part of the park, Shannon? So,
TEC doesn't have a role in the review of Mapas.
Um, well, it's, it's led by health.
Um, and, um, we've had a, uh, a, we've, we've had a read
of it, is what I'd describe it as.
We just have been consult involved
only, only on the periphery,
Not consulted.
Yes, consulted. Okay. Yeah. What was your advice?
Um, I couldn't, uh, off the top
of my head, I would've to come back to you.
So I'll put that as a follow up question. Thank
You. Got, your
Honor. Any other
questions for tc?
I think that brings us to an end. Thank you, um, very much.
Your co your, uh, engagement. Oh, yeah. Sorry.
Do you want any concluding remarks? Thanks, Vanessa.
Thank you, Ellen. Thank you, Tim. Thank you. Very welcome.
Really appreciate, um, your time engagement
and answering our questions.
Members. We're gonna meet with OIG quickly,
and then we'll be breaking after that.